== Ethernet Networking and Data Encapsulation ==

I really want you to grasp the big picture of LANs conceptually. The role Ethernet plays in today’s
networks as well as what Media Access Control (MAC) addresses are and how they are used are
two more critical networking basics you’ll want a solid understanding of as well.

you’ll also learn about some very important Ethernet specifications.
I’ll review the types of cabling
used with Cisco devices in this chapter, demonstrate how to connect to a router or switch, plus
show you how to connect a router or switch via a console connection.

I’ll also introduce you to a vital process of encoding data as it makes its way down the OSI stack,
known as encapsulation.

Ethernet:
- Ethernet is a contention-based media access method that allows all hosts on a network to share
the same link’s bandwidth
- Praktis

Without employing VLANs in today’s switched environments, there
wouldn’t be much bandwidth available to individual users. Switches break up collision domains
with each port, which is awesome, but they’re still only one broadcast domain by default! It’s also
one more reason why it’s extremely important to design our networks very carefully

And key to carefully planning your network design is never to allow broadcast domains to grow
too large and get out of control. Both collision and broadcast domains can easily be controlled
with routers and VLANs, so there’s just no excuse to allow user bandwidth to slow to a painful
crawl when there are plenty of tools in your arsenal to prevent the suffering.

Ethernet networking uses a protocol called Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision
Detection (CSMA/CD), which helps devices share the bandwidth evenly while preventing two
devices from transmitting simultaneously on the same network medium

CSMA/CD was actually
created to overcome the problem of the collisions that occur when packets are transmitted from
different nodes at the same time. And trust me—good collision management is crucial, because
when a node transmits in a CSMA/CD network, all the other nodes on the network receive and
examine that transmission

You can use full-duplex Ethernet in at least the following six situations:
- switch to host
- switch to switch
- host to host
- switch to router
- router to router
- router to host

Last, remember these important points:
- There are no collisions in full-duplex mode.
- A dedicated switch port is required for each full-duplex node.
- The host network card and the switch port must be capable of operating in full-duplex mode.
- The default behavior of 10Base-T and 100Base-T hosts is 10 Mbps half-duplex if the
autodetect mechanism fails, so it is always good practice to set the speed and duplex of each
port on a switch if you can.

= Ethernet at the Data Link Layer =
Ethernet at the Data Link layer is responsible for Ethernet addressing, commonly referred to as
MAC or hardware addressing

Ethernet is also responsible for framing packets received from the
Network layer and preparing them for transmission on the local network through the Ethernet
contention-based media access method.

MAC Address terdiri dari 12 digit: 6 OUI dan 6 NIC
atau terdiri dari 6 byte yang setara dengan 48 bit

1 byte is 8 bits, bits mean a slot for 0 and 1. So, if you have 4 bits, u can represent a number from 0 to 15 
0 = 0000
15 = 1111

= Binary Values, Nibble, Hex =
10000000 = 128
11000000 = 192
11100000 = 224
11110000 = 240
11111000 = 248
11111100 = 252
11111110 = 254
11111111 = 255

Now suppose you have something like this: 0x6A. This is important because sometimes Cisco
likes to put 0x in front of characters so you know that they are a hex value. It doesn’t have any
other special meaning.

1 hex is 1 nibble consisted of 4 bit

ox6A: Six equals 0110, and A, which is 10 in hex, equals 1010, so the complete byte would
be 01101010.

To convert from binary to hex, just take the byte and break it into nibbles. Let me clarify this.
Say you have the binary number 01010101. First, break it into nibbles—0101 and 0101—with the
value of each nibble being 5 since the 1 and 4 bits are on. This makes the hex answer 0x55. And
in decimal format, the binary number is 01010101, which converts to 64 + 16 + 4 + 1 = 85.

= Ethernet Frames = 

The Data Link layer is responsible for combining bits into bytes and bytes into frames. Frames
are used at the Data Link layer to encapsulate packets handed down from the Network layer for
transmission on a type of media access.

Ethernet frame terdiri atas:
- Preamble 7 bytes
- SFD 1 byte
- Destination 6 bytes
- Source 6 bytes
- Type 2 bytes
- Data and Pad 46 - 1500 bytes
- FCS 4 bytes

note: Encapsulating a frame within a different type of frame is called tunneling.

note: jarak menjadi faktor penting ketika menentukan kabel network. diperlukan repeater untuk jarak yang jauh

kabel:
1. Category 5 Enhanced UTP cable
The category 5 Enhanced UTP cable can handle speeds up to a gigabit with a distance of up to
100 meters. Typically we’d use this cable for 100 Mbps and category 6 for a gigabit, but the
category 5 Enhanced is rated for gigabit speeds and category 6 is rated for 10 Gbps!

= Straight-Through Cable = 
is used to connect
- host to switch or hub
- router to switch or hub
4 wires are used in straight-through cable to connect ethernet devices

= Crossover Cable = 
is used to connect
- switch to switch
- hub to hub
- host to host
- hub to switch
- router direct to host
- router to router
dinamakan crossover karena pemasangan kabel pada pinnya ga 1 to 1, tapi cross

= UTP Gigabit Wiring (1000Base-T) =

Butuh 4 pasang (total 8 kabel)

= Rolled Cable =

for console connection to router

= Data Encapsulation =
When a host transmits data across a network to another device, the data goes through a process
called encapsulation and is wrapped with protocol information at each layer of the OSI model.
Each layer communicates only with its peer layer on the receiving device.

To communicate and exchange information, each layer uses protocol data units (PDUs). These
hold the control information attached to the data at each layer of the model. They are usually
attached to the header in front of the data field but can also be at the trailer, or end, of it.

Remember that the Transport and Network layers work together to rebuild a data stream on a
receiving host, but it’s not part of their work to place their PDUs on a local network segment—
which is the only way to get the information to a router or host.

It’s the Data Link layer that’s responsible for taking packets from the Network layer and placing
them on the network medium (cable or wireless).

To put this frame on the network, it must first be put into a digital signal. Since a frame is really a
logical group of 1s and 0s, the physical layer is responsible for encoding these digits into a digital
signal, which is read by devices on the same local network. The receiving devices will
synchronize on the digital signal and extract (decode) the 1s and 0s from the digital signal.

Remember that a data stream is handed down from the upper layer to the Transport layer. As
technicians, we really don’t care who the data stream comes from because that’s really a
programmer’s problem. Our job is to rebuild the data stream reliably and hand it to the upper
layers on the receiving device.

port number tuh ada di transport layer
ip address tuh ada di network layer
mac address tuh ada di data link layer

Hierarchy has many of the same benefits in network design that it does in other areas of life.
When used properly, it makes networks more predictable and helps us define which areas should
perform certain functions. Likewise, you can use tools such as access lists at certain levels in
hierarchical networks and avoid them at others.

Let’s face it: Large networks can be extremely complicated, with multiple protocols, detailed
configurations, and diverse technologies. Hierarchy helps us summarize a complex collection of
details into an understandable model, bringing order from the chaos. Then, as specific
configurations are needed, the model dictates the appropriate manner in which to apply them.

3 hierarchical layers:
1. Core
2. Distribution
3. Access

= The Core Layer = 
The core layer is literally the core of the network. At the top of the hierarchy, the core layer is
responsible for transporting large amounts of traffic both reliably and quickly. The only purpose
of the network’s core layer is to switch traffic as fast as possible. The traffic transported across
the core is common to a majority of users. But remember that user data is processed at the
distribution layer, which forwards the requests to the core if needed.

= The Distribution Layer =
The distribution layer is sometimes referred to as the workgroup layer and is the
communication point between the access layer and the core. The primary functions of the
distribution layer are to provide routing, filtering, and WAN access and to determine how
packets can access the core, if needed. The distribution layer must determine the fastest way that
network service requests are handled—for example, how a file request is forwarded to a server.
After the distribution layer determines the best path, it forwards the request to the core layer if
necessary. The core layer then quickly transports the request to the correct service.

= The Access Layer =
The access layer controls user and workgroup access to internetwork resources. The access
layer is sometimes referred to as the desktop layer. The network resources most users need will
be available locally because the distribution layer handles any traffic for remote services.

= Summary = 
In this chapter, you learned the fundamentals of Ethernet networking, how hosts communicate
on a network. You discovered how CSMA/CD works in an Ethernet half-duplex network.
I also talked about the differences between half- and full-duplex modes, and we discussed the
collision detection mechanism called CSMA/CD.
I described the common Ethernet cable types used in today’s networks in this chapter as well,
and by the way, you’d be wise to study that section really well!
Important enough to not gloss over, this chapter provided an introduction to encapsulation.
Encapsulation is the process of encoding data as it goes down the OSI stack.
Last, I covered the Cisco three-layer hierarchical model. I described in detail the three layers and
how each is used to help design and implement a Cisco internetwork.

= Note =
Backoff on an Ethernet network is the retransmission delay that’s enforced when a
collision occurs. When that happens, a host will only resume transmission after the forced
time delay has expired. Keep in mind that after the backoff has elapsed, all stations have equal
priority to transmit data.

Half-duplex Ethernet networking uses a protocol called Carrier Sense Multiple Access with
Collision Detection (CSMA/CD), which helps devices share the bandwidth evenly while
preventing two devices from transmitting simultaneously on the same network medium.

Physical addresses or MAC addresses are used to identify devices at layer 2. MAC
addresses are only used to communicate on the same network. To communicate on different
network, we have to use layer 3 addresses (IP addresses).

An Ethernet network is a shared environment, so all devices have the right to access the
medium. If more than one device transmits simultaneously, the signals collide and cannot
reach the destination. If a device detects another device is sending, it will wait for a specified
amount of time before attempting to transmit.

In creating the gigabit crossover cable, you’d still cross 1 to 3 and 2 to 6, but you would add
4 to 7 and 5 to 8.

When you set up the connection, use these settings:
Bits per sec: 9600
Data bits: 8
Parity: None
Stop bits: 1
Flow control: None

U/L:When set to 0, this bit represents a globally administered address, as specified by the IEEE,
but when it’s a 1, it represents a locally governed and administered address.

There are no collisions in full-duplex mode

If you’re using TCP, the virtual circuit is defined by the source and destination port
number plus the source and destination IP address and called a socket.

