ICND1 Install, operate, and troubleshoot: IP data networks, LAN switching tech, IPv6, IP routing tech, IP services, network device security, basic troubleshooting

ICND2 Install, operate, and troubleshoot: LAN switching tech, IP routin tech, security, troubleshooting, WAN tech

Some tips to take the Cisco Exam

== Chapter 1: Internetworking ==
  Internetwork := you create an internetwork when you connect two or more networks via a router and configure a logical network addressing scheme with a protocol such as IP or IPv6

Imagine network as a neighborhood with its rule of street and way. There are some block or segmentation also. 
  Hub doesn't have mind, switch does

Terlalu banyak broadcast/multicast gitu dapat mengakibatkan LAN traffic congestion

Hubs don't segment the network; they just connect network segments. Routers are basically employed to efficiently break up a broadcast domain

Routers create internetwork

we don’t use layer 2 switches to create internetworks because they don’t break up broadcast domains by default. Jadi, si switch teh cuma digunakan dalam lingkup LAN saja

Okay, so by default, switches break up collision domains, but what are these things? Collision
domain is an Ethernet term used to describe a network scenario in which one device sends a
packet out on a network segment and every other device on that same segment is forced to pay
attention no matter what. This isn’t very efficient because if a different device tries to transmit at
the same time, a collision will occur, requiring both devices to retransmit, one at a time—not
good! This happens a lot in a hub environment, where each host segment connects to a hub that
represents only one collision domain and a single broadcast domain. By contrast, each and every
port on a switch represents its own collision domain, allowing network traffic to flow much more
smoothly.

Still, clearly the best network design is the one that’s perfectly configured to meet the business
requirements of the specific company or client it serves, and it’s usually one in which LAN
switches exist in harmony with routers strategically placed in the network

Ada istilah collision domain dan broadcast domain. collision tuh dari satu point ke point lainnya (kalo bolak balik sama ga diitun). Eh entahlah masih ga jelas wkwkk

saat buku dibuat, switch 10 Gbps itu minimum

Broadcast Domain:
- A group of devices that will hear a broadcast by a host
- Separated by Routers

Collision Domain:
- All the devices in danger of a collision if two or more transmit at the same time
- Routers, Switches, bridges separate collision domains
- Repeaters and hubs create a single collision domain

7. Application Layer:
- The Application layer is working as the
interface between the actual application program and the next layer down by providing ways for
the application to send information down through the protocol stack
- Identifying and confirming the communication partner’s availability and verifying the required
resources to permit the specified type of communication to take place also occurs at the
Application layer

6. Presentation Layer:
- The Presentation layer gets its name from its purpose: It presents data to the Application layer
and is responsible for data translation and code formatting
- So just
remember that by providing translation services, the Presentation layer ensures that data
transferred from the Application layer of one system can be read by the Application layer of
another one

5. Session Layer:
- The Session layer is responsible for setting up, managing, and dismantling sessions between
Presentation layer entities and keeping user data separate. Dialog control between devices also
occurs at this layer.
- Communication between hosts’ various applications at the Session layer, as from a client to a
server, is coordinated and organized via three different modes: simplex, half-duplex, and fullduplex.

4. Transport Layer:
- The Transport layer segments and reassembles data into a single data stream
- A pair of well-known protocols called TCP and UDP are integral to this layer
- The term reliable networking can be used at the Transport layer. Reliable
networking requires that acknowledgments, sequencing, and flow control will all be used.
- For reliable transport to occur, a device that wants to transmit must first establish a connectionoriented
communication session with a remote device—its peer system—known as a call setup or
a three-way handshake. Once this process is complete, the data transfer occurs, and when it’s
finished, a call termination takes place to tear down the virtual circuit.

Transport Layer bisa jadi bottleneck kalo semua perangkat lain dah bagus tapi spek network device nya ccd
Ada istilah buffer ketika datanya rada tersendat karena terlalu melebihi kapasitas traffic
solusinya adalah flow control

Connection-oriented service:
- pakai three way handshake
- it uses sequencing
- it uses acknowledgement 
- it uses flow control: buffering, windowing, and congestion avoidance

Uses session multiplexing agar ketika di tab baru masih dengan session yang sama

3. Network Layer:


== Internetworking Models ===

