== Chapter 3: Introduction to TCP/IP ==

It may be counterintuitive, but most of the development work on TCP/IP happened at UC
Berkeley in Northern California, where a group of scientists were simultaneously working on the
Berkeley version of UNIX, which soon became known as the Berkeley Software Distribution
(BSD) series of UNIX versions.

= TCP/IP and DoD Model =

The DoD model is basically a condensed version of the OSI model that comprises four instead of
seven layers:
- Process / Application Layer
- Host-to-Host layer or Transport Layer
- Internet Layer
- Network Access layer or Link layer

the Process/Application
layer defines protocols for node-to-node application communication and controls user-interface
specifications.

The Host-to-Host layer or Transport layer parallels the functions of the OSI’s Transport layer,
defining protocols for setting up the level of transmission service for applications. It tackles
issues like creating reliable end-to-end communication and ensuring the error-free delivery of
data. It handles packet sequencing and maintains data integrity.

The Internet layer corresponds to the OSI’s Network layer, designating the protocols relating to
the logical transmission of packets over the entire network. It takes care of the addressing of
hosts by giving them an IP (Internet Protocol) address and handles the routing of packets among
multiple networks.

At the bottom of the DoD model, the Network Access layer or Link layer implements the data
exchange between the host and the network. The equivalent of the Data Link and Physical layers
of the OSI model, the Network Access layer oversees hardware addressing and defines protocols
for the physical transmission of data. The reason TCP/IP became so popular is because there
were no set physical layer specifications, so it could run on any existing or future physical
network!

Kan ada DoD model ya... nah TCP/IP protocol suite tuh ada di setiap layer DoD

telnet teh kayak windows viewer yak, tapi windows viewer pake UDP
SSH tau lah ya buat apa
FTP untuk transfer file, bisa kasih tau informasi directory juga. FTP dipake kalo mau transfer big size of file
SNMP untuk collect network information dari Network Management Station (NMS)
HTTP tau ya, tapi ini protokol lhoo
HTTPS 
Network Time Protocol synchronize the clocks on our computers to one standard time source (typically, an atomic clock)

DNS resolve hostname to IP address
An IP address identifies hosts on a network and the Internet as well, but DNS was designed to
make our lives easier. Think about this: What would happen if you wanted to move your web
page to a different service provider?

= DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) =
It assigns IP address to host
It allows for easier
administration and works well in small to very large network environments. Many types of
hardware can be used as a DHCP server, including a Cisco router.

A client that sends out a DHCP Discover message in order to receive an IP address sends out a
broadcast at both layer 2 and layer 3.
The layer 2 broadcast is all Fs in hex, which looks like this: ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff.
The layer 3 broadcast is 255.255.255.255, which means all networks and all hosts.

DHCP client four step process:
1. The DHCP client broadcasts a DHCP Discover message looking for a DHCP server (Port 67).
2. The DHCP server that received the DHCP Discover message sends a layer 2 unicast DHCP
Offer message back to the host.
3. The client then broadcasts to the server a DHCP Request message asking for the offered IP
address and possibly other information.
4. The server finalizes the exchange with a unicast DHCP Acknowledgment message.

The main purpose of the Host-to-Host layer is to shield the upper-layer applications from the
complexities of the network. This layer says to the upper layer, “Just give me your data stream,
with any instructions, and I’ll begin the process of getting your information ready to send.”

= Transmission Control Protocol =
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) takes large blocks of information from an application and
breaks them into segments. It numbers and sequences each segment so that the destination’s TCP
stack can put the segments back into the order the application intended

TCP is a full-duplex, connection-oriented, reliable, and accurate protocol, but establishing all
these terms and conditions, in addition to error checking, is no small task.

Most programmers use TCP because it removes a lot of programming work, but for real-time
video and VoIP, User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is often better because using it results in less
overhead.

= TCP Segment Format =
Source port 16 digit - Destination port 16 digit
masih banyak lagi dibawahnya

= User Datagram Protocol =
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is basically the scaled-down economy model of TCP, which is
why UDP is sometimes referred to as a thin protocol. Like a thin person on a park bench, a thin
protocol doesn’t take up a lot of room—or in this case, require much bandwidth on a network.

So clearly, there are times that it’s wise for developers to opt for UDP rather than TCP, one of
them being when reliability is already taken care of at the Process/Application layer. Network
File System (NFS) handles its own reliability issues, making the use of TCP both impractical and
redundant. But ultimately, it’s up to the application developer to opt for using UDP or TCP, not
the user who wants to transfer data faster!

UDP does not sequence the segments and does not care about the order in which the segments
arrive at the destination. UDP just sends the segments off and forgets about them. It doesn’t
follow through, check up on them, or even allow for an acknowledgment of safe arrival—
complete abandonment. Because of this, it’s referred to as an unreliable protocol. This does not
mean that UDP is ineffective, only that it doesn’t deal with reliability issues at all.

= UDP Segment Format =
16 bit source port - 16 bit destination port
16 bit length - 16 bit checksum
data

= Internet Layer Protocol =

All network roads don’t lead to Rome—they lead to IP.
ada internet protocol
Remember, just as all
roads lead to Rome, all segments or data must go through IP!

= ICMP =
yah ping

= Address Resolution Protocol =
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) finds the hardware address of a host from a known IP
address.

hardware address—the latter is hard-coded on a
network interface card (NIC) and used for finding hosts on a local network

= The Hierarchical IP Addressing Scheme =
The 32-bit IP address is a structured or hierarchical address, as opposed to a flat or
nonhierarchical address. Although either type of addressing scheme could have been used,
hierarchical addressing was chosen for a good reason. The advantage of this scheme is that it can
handle a large number of addresses, namely 4.3 billion (a 32-bit address space with two possible
values for each position—either 0 or 1—gives you 23 2 , or 4,294,967,296). The disadvantage of
the flat addressing scheme, and the reason it’s not used for IP addressing, relates to routing. If
every address were unique, all routers on the Internet would need to store the address of each
and every machine on the Internet. This would make efficient routing impossible, even if only a
fraction of the possible addresses were used!
The solution to this problem is to use a two- or three-level hierarchical addressing scheme that is
structured by network and host or by network, subnet, and host.

= Network Addressing =
The network address (which can also be called the network number) uniquely identifies each
network. Every machine on the same network shares that network address as part of its IP
address. For example, in the IP address 172.16.30.56, 172.16 is the network address.

Subdividing an IP address into a network and node address is determined by the class
designation of one’s network

Class A: network.node.node.node (bit pertama pada byte pertama harus 0)
Class B: network.network.node.node (bit pertama harus nyala dan bit kedua harus 0 pada byte pertama)
Class C: network.network.network.node (110, )

If every host on every network was required to have real routable IP addresses, we would have
run out of IP addresses to hand out years ago. But by using private IP addresses, ISPs,
corporations, and home users only need a relatively tiny group of bona fide IP addresses to
connect their networks to the Internet. This is economical because they can use private IP
addresses on their inside networks and get along just fine.

To accomplish this task, the ISP and the corporation—the end user, no matter who they are—
need to use something called Network Address Translation (NAT), which basically takes a
private IP address and converts it for use on the Internet. NAT is covered in Chapter 13,
“Network Address Translation (NAT).” Many people can use the same real IP address to
transmit out onto the Internet. Doing things this way saves megatons of address space—good for
us all!

So, What Private IP Address Should I Use?
That’s a really great question: Should you use Class A, Class B, or even Class C private
addressing when setting up your network? Let’s take Acme Corporation in SF as an example.
This company is moving into a new building and needs a whole new network. It has 14
departments, with about 70 users in each. You could probably squeeze one or two Class C
addresses to use, or maybe you could use a Class B, or even a Class A just for fun.
The rule of thumb in the consulting world is, when you’re setting up a corporate network—
regardless of how small it is—you should use a Class A network address because it gives you
the most flexibility and growth options. For example, if you used the 10.0.0.0 network
address with a /24 mask, then you’d have 65,536 networks, each with 254 hosts. Lots of
room for growth with that network!
But if you’re setting up a home network, you’d opt for a Class C address because it is the
easiest for people to understand and configure. Using the default Class C mask gives you one
network with 254 hosts—plenty for a home network.
With the Acme Corporation, a nice 10.1.×.0 with a /24 mask (the × is the subnet for each
department) makes this easy to design, install, and troubleshoot.

= IPv4 Addresses Types =
Loopback (localhost) Used to test the IP stack on the local computer. Can be any address
from 127.0.0.1 through 127.255.255.254.

Layer 2 broadcasts These are sent to all nodes on a LAN.

Broadcasts (layer 3) These are sent to all nodes on the network.

Unicast This is an address for a single interface, and these are used to send packets to a single
destination host.

Multicast These are packets sent from a single source and transmitted to many devices on
different networks. Referred to as “one-to-many.”

= Layer 2 Broadcast =
First, understand that layer 2 broadcasts are also known as hardware broadcasts—they only go
out on a LAN, but they don’t go past the LAN boundary (router).

The typical hardware address is 6 bytes (48 bits) and looks something like 45:AC:24:E3:60:A5.

Every network interface card (NIC) will receive and read the frame, including the router, since
this was a layer 2 broadcast, but the router would never, ever forward this!

= Unicast =

A unicast is defined as a single IP address that’s assigned to a network interface card and is the
destination IP address in a packet—in other words, it’s used for directing packets to a specific
host.

= Multicast =

Multicast is a different beast entirely. At first glance, it appears to be a hybrid of unicast and
broadcast communication, but that isn’t quite the case. Multicast does allow point-to-multipoint
communication, which is similar to broadcasts, but it happens in a different manner. The crux of
multicast is that it enables multiple recipients to receive messages without flooding the messages
to all hosts on a broadcast domain. However, this is not the default behavior—it’s what we can do
with multicasting if it’s configured correctly!

Multicast works by sending messages or data to IP multicast group addresses. Unlike with
broadcasts, which aren’t forwarded, routers then forward copies of the packet out to every
interface that has hosts subscribed to that group address. This is where multicast differs from
broadcast messages—with multicast communication, copies of packets, in theory, are sent only
to subscribed hosts. For example, when I say in theory, I mean that the hosts will receive a
multicast packet destined for 224.0.0.10. This is an EIGRP packet, and only a router running the
EIGRP protocol will read these. All hosts on the broadcast LAN, and Ethernet is a broadcast
multi-access LAN technology, will pick up the frame, read the destination address, then
immediately discard the frame unless they’re in the multicast group. This saves PC processing,
not LAN bandwidth.

Latihan Soal:

Class A private IP address: 10.0.0.0 through 10.255.255.255
Class B private IP address: 172.16.0.0 through 172.31.255.255
Class C private IP address: 192.168.0.0 through 192.168.255.255

If a DHCP conflict is detected, either by the server sending a ping and getting a response or
by a host using a gratuitous ARP (arp’ing for its own IP address and seeing if a host responds),
then the server will hold that address and not use it again until it is fixed by an administrator.

Secure Shell (SSH) protocol sets up a secure session that’s similar to Telnet over a standard
TCP/IP connection and is employed for doing things like logging into systems, running
programs on remote systems, and moving files from one system to another.

A host uses something called a gratuitous ARP to help avoid a possible duplicate address.
The DHCP client sends an ARP broadcast out on the local LAN or VLAN using its newly
assigned address to help solve conflicts before they occur

Both FTP and Telnet use TCP at the Transport layer; however, they both are Application
layer protocols, so the Application layer is the best answer for this question.
